---
title: "Making Slides"
date: 2018-03-24T09:50:01-04:00
fave: true
categories: [Sociology,Nerdery,Obiter Dicta]
footnotes: false
htmlwidgets: false
mathjax: false
---


I was asked to give a short talk in my Departmental Proseminar yesterday on the topic of giving presentations, and specifically about making slides effective. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-001.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

There is more than one way to give a good talk, and there is more than one way to make "good slides" or---better---make good use of slides and other material you might want to show people. So the things I'll talk about and especially the specific techniques I'll discuss are selected from many good ways to present yourself and your work. Presenting is a two-sided process, where you should be comfortable with what you are saying (and how you're saying it), on one side, and where your audience should be able to follow along and understand your message, on the other. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-002.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Presenting is a kind of performance. It is one of several ways we
communicate the content of our ideas or research. The
impression-management involved in any talk is often annoying. At times
it can even be inimical to the intellectual activity you're trying to
get across. But it's also unavoidable, and it is not entirely bad. Try
to see it as continuous with all of the other forms of communication
you engage in all the time---from informal conversation and written
messages to formal papers and books. They all have their distinctive
rituals and conventions, too.

You need to know who your audience is. My audience is a group of
graduate students in the social sciences. These are people just
starting out, usually speaking in front of people who will have few if
any strong preconceptions about them or their work. At times, such as
a job talk, a lot might be at stake. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-003.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

I'll say three things. First, I want you to think about what a talk
is, as opposed to (for example) a paper, or a set of slides. Second,
how can you use slides to show and tell your audience what you have to
say? I'll talk about how I find it useful to *layer*, *highlight*, and
*repeat* design elements in a way that helps the audience follow
along. And third, a little more specifically, I'll talk about how to
*make things clear* on your slides when it comes to presenting
results or details.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-004.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

First, what do I mean, "give a talk"? There are many ways to
effectively run an argument or convey research results or bring your
audience into the topic you want to develop. I'm not going to try to
survey them. Instead, I just want to emphasize two things.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-005.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

First, and to repeat, a talk is a performance and inevitably involves
a lot of impression-management, especially when something important is
at stake. In a context like a job talk, what people generally want to
come away with is the feeling that the presenter is in control of
their material, that they know what they are doing, and that what
they are doing is, ideally, interesting and important.

What that means concretely will vary depending on who you are, what
your research looks like, and who your audience is. People are often
not assessed fairly, or according to a single standard. But it's also
true that, whether as a matter of the investment that people have made
in making the talk happen, or just in the pure desire to have a
successful interaction, audiences really *want* talks to go well.
Outside of adversarial settings, no one wants to watch someone
bomb. This means that presenters start out with the audience on their
side to a much greater degree than people often realize. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-006.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Second, there's the content of the talk. Behind every good talk is the
actual content of what you have to say. This is always far more
detailed than can be conveyed in the time you have. That content is a
paper, or a chapter of your dissertation, or at least a specific
finding or argument that you have spent a lot of time working out.
For convenience, let's just call it "the paper". 

To put it bluntly, if the paper is bad, then it doesn't really matter how
polished the talk is, or how good the slides look. By the same token,
if the talk is bad, then people won't learn how good the paper is. And
if your slides are bad, it's going to be harder to give a good talk.

The actual slides are the most immediately visible but also the least
substantively important part of your material. While I'm going to
highlight a few rules and techniques about making decent slides, do
not lose sight of the fact that if your paper is bad, your talk is
going to be bad too. 

The paper is not the talk. The paper is what the talk is *about*. In
some fields, the talk can be *very* closely related to the paper, and
there are still people trained to "read the paper" in the
old-fashioned sense. But this is increasingly rare. In most fields,
especially when presenting the results of a data analysis, the
presenter must condense, summarize, and highlight the important parts
of their own work. The paper is the most important thing; the talk is
about the paper; and you use your slides to help you give a better
talk.


{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-007.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

What are slides good for? I think they are best thought of as
signposts or billboards or advertisements for the talk you are giving.
They're meant to help the audience follow along and occasionally to
show them important things. They support the content of the talk and
keep people on the road you want them to be on. 

Now, think about what good road signs or effective billboards look
like. They have strong imagery, they are clearly interpretable, and
they contain few if any words.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-008.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

A corollary of this way of thinking about your visual
material is this: *don't write your talk on the slides*. The most
common way a talk fails is that the presenter uses their Keynote or
PowerPoint slide deck as an *outliner* for themselves. They use it as
something to help themselves, rather as something to help the
audience. They start making notes for what they want to say and put
those notes on the slides. All of that text (bullet-point after
bullet-point) ends up on the screen, where they then read it to
the audience. Don't do this.

This kind of bad talk is why many people profess to hate slides as
such. Occasionally they are annoyed enough to generalize expansively
about how PowerPoint-itis is a feature of the End of Thinking or the
Decline of the West. Personally, I think those people have not been
unlucky enough to sit through talks where the presenter has not even
bothered to prepare slides.

A related point is that using the slides as an outliner tends to make
talks too long. In talks, as in life, you have less time than you
think. Half the battle of conveying competence and presenting
effectively is being aware of what you can say in the time you have
available. It is far less than you think, even after trying to take
that fact into account. Even worse, the phenomenology of *giving* a
talk is very different from that of *listening* to one. When you give
a talk, time will seem to pass *much* faster for you than it will for
your audience. If you run out of time and you have a very large number
of slides with a lot of text on them, you will risk developing a kind
of tunnel vision. The goal of "getting through your slides" will
become a kind of death wish, a goal to be accomplished at the cost of
your audience's time and patience.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-008a.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

What should your slides do instead? And how should you do it? The
slides can help the audience follow along as you tell them what you
are going to do, and then as you do it. One straightforward but effective
technique is to build up your argument, your data, or
your findings, by *layering* material, *highlighting* new elements,
and *repeating* methods of presentation or design elements so that
your audience can follow the logic of what you're saying.

Here are some examples.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-009.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Here's a slide from a talk where I'm trying to tell people about the
corner of a specific field that I am going to be discussing. So
beginning from the most expansive definition of the field ("A mode of
inquiry"), we gradually narrow the focus to the actual content of the
dataset by the time we get to "At Universities in Five Countries". I
repeatedly overlay the elements to narrow them down one piece at a
time, talking about each step as I go. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-010.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

The repetition of design elements can also be used to connect your theory or ideas to the data you are presenting. For example, here I know I am going to end up showing a scatterplot of the relationship between two variables, "Status Distance" and "Deviation from Consensus". So I introduce the two ideas with that in mind.  

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-011.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Then I talk about three possibly interesting ways that status distance and deviation from consensus might related, showing the audience what an idealized relationship might look like on the scatterplot in each case. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-012.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

By the time we get to the graph, the audience has the basic
relationship in their minds, has a sense the shape of the association
they might be looking for in the data, and can take the time to
understand the details of the scatterplot without being overwhelmed by
it, or by having to take in from scratch a whole lot of information
about what's on the graph. By anticipating the end point, we've
(hopefully) brought them along with us as we've moved from the general
ideas to our expectations for the data to the actual results.

Again, your data will be different. Your goals will be different. The general point is to think about how best to convey that data and those goals using the design elements in your slides. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-013.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

What else can we say about using design elements to make the details of your talk clearer and easier to follow?

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-014.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

When presenting data or results on slides, try to use figures rather than tables as much as you can. If nothing else, tables are hard to even see properly on a big screen, let alone quickly interpret. Large screens have lower resolutions than you think. Things that appear quite legible on your beautiful, high-resolution laptop screen will be much harder to see on a six-foot wide projected image from twenty feet away. (That applies to figures, too by the way.)

Learn how to make figures and graphs properly. That's a skill that goes far beyond giving talks. I have [written a book on data visualization](http://socviz.co) that teaches you how to do it. Just notice here, though, that the figure here has many deliberate design elements meant to help the audience. The estimates are ordered by magnitude. The gridlines are visible but subtle. The zero line is slightly emphasized, and so on. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-015.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Layering, highlighting, and repeating elements can also be used with graphics and figures. Here we start with a dendrogram of subject areas. It has quite a lot of small text. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-016.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

As I talk around the figure, giving an interpretation of it, I use some semi-transparent overlays to pick out some of the structure in the figure and make an argument about it.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-017.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

This can be done over several steps, focusing further on some particular areas of interest and building up the details of the interpretation. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-018.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

We can repeat these techniques both within and across slides, too. For example, here I  have three figures with the same basic structure on the slide, showing gaps in the use of three kinds of alternative financial services. We pick out the labels as we go, and the audience can see how the gaps are consistent across the different items.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-019.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

This gets continued on the next slide, talking about a different but
related category, so-called "Adverse Credit Events". The visual
language, structure, and design elements are carried over in a way
that lets the audience more easily understand what they are looking
at, and lets the presenter continue to build their argument. In this
slide the graph panels are also laid out in an ordered way, left to
right from highest to lowest average incidence. Small details like
this will make it easier for the audience to follow along.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-020.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Sometimes tables are necessary. If you do use them, do it properly. Good tables are carefully laid out. Look at the tables of results or summary data in journals like the *AJS*. They very rarely use vertical lines to separate columns. The white space in the  columnar layout does that job instead. They minimize the use of horizontal lines, too, instead using spacing to separate parts of the table. 

When showing tables on a large screen, it can be useful to subtly differentiate the rows with an alternating background shade, as here, but it's not always necessary. Judicious use of color can highlight elements of interest when needed. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-021.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

The paper is the most important thing. The paper is not the talk. The talk is about the paper. The slides help you give the talk. A few small techniques can go a long way to helping your audience out.

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-022.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

Talks are a performance. That makes them annoying, but it also means that like most interactions, both sides want it to go well. Try to use that Goffmanian fact to your advantage when you can. 

{{% figure src = "https://kieranhealy.org/files/misc/sampletalk-023.png" alt = "" caption = "" %}}

That last point extends to the Q&A part of the talk. Do not try to stuff everything you have into your main presentation. (As I've said, this is an impossible task if you have actually done any work.) Instead, keep all that additional stuff in reserve. Anticipate where you will get questions. Leave openings for those questions and be ready with a response, including a slide if necessary. That way, you are more likely to have the ideal sort of performance, where the speaker and the audience can both come away feeling good about themselves: the audience because they asked smart questions, and the speaker because they were ready with an answer. This extends to the meta-level of feeling good, where the audience can feel good about the speaker's competence, and thus feel good about their own good taste for choosing to invite the speaker out, or attend the conference session. Everyone ends up happy. This is far more preferable than the second-best outcome, where the audience (still determined to make themselves feel good) will fall back on wanting to feel more clever than the speaker, and pat themselves on the back for asking questions the speaker could not answer.

All of this is a little absurd, I agree. But that's just how it goes. You are sociologists. Remember your Goffman and do what you can to manage the interaction to get the outcome everyone wants. 
